Let's get into some HTML.
We are going to build our
very first website and
it's not gonna be a particularly exciting
website, but it's gonna be a website,
it'll be a valid website.
It's gonna be a little ugly.
It would be like building a house and
then not putting any wallpaper or
siding on it or anything like that.
Technically a valid house, maybe not
the best house, but we're gonna start with
technically valid house because I think
that's a good place to start with.
So HTML, Hypertext Markup Language,
technically not a programming language
because it doesn't actually do anything.
You can think of it kind of like English,
right?
You can't run English, when you just
say English it has meaning, right?
But it's the same thing with HTML.
It has meaning but it actually doesn't
run, it doesn't do anything by itself,
you'll need the JavaScript to
actually do something to it.
So the base building block in
HTML is something called a tag.
And here on this line right here,
we have the most basic HTML
that you could think of.
So I have my text here.
This is a title to my document.
And then it's surrounded by these two,
what we call tags,
a beginning tag and an end tag, okay?
By the way, these are totally interactive
so you can just start editing and
you'll see what that looks like down
here in this little result thing.
We'll be doing that a lot today, okay?
So I have this h1 tag
which is a heading tag and
every tag in HTML has a beginning tag and
an end tag.
Some of them are self closing, we'll
talk about that here in just a second.
But for now, think about the opening tag
which doesn't have the slash here, right?
So you have this little slash thing here.
A beginning tag doesn't have the slash and
then the end tag always has the slash.
So that's kind of how
you can think about it.
There's an opening tag, everything
between it and then a closing tag.
So everything inside of this h1.
So this is the title to my document,
is inside of that opening or
this header tag.
The tag declares what you are looking at,
right?
So this particular one is a header.
So for
example this complete intro to WEB DEV V3,
that is the heading of my
website that I've created here.
So that would be in an h1 tag.
There's some 300 different types of tags,
I think we're gonna go over some of them,
the most useful of them today.
We're then going to take these tags and
we're gonna start building larger and
larger documents.
So we're gonna have
hundreds of tags on a page,
there's probably websites that
have thousands of tags on a page.
I'm sure this site probably has at least a
hundred on it, cuz we'll start using them
and we'll start nesting them and
I'll show you that here in just a second.
So something that's important is
obviously by putting this in an h1,
I've made this big, right?
And I can put in a different kinda tag,
like, if I made this a p tag,
instead of an h1 tag,
notice that it is much smaller now, right?
Because a paragraph of text,
which is what p stands for,
it's gonna be much smaller than a heading,
right?
I think if you're
creating a Word document,
you have some sort of heading, right?
And then I'll have all
the little text underneath it.
That's kind of the same concept here.
But just know that later,
I can actually go and use CSS,
the styling component here, to make things
bigger or smaller or things like that.
So what I'm actually more communicating
here by what kind of tag I'm choosing
is what the semantic meaning of this
particular bit of text is, right?
I wouldn't wanna put a paragraph of
text here like this paragraph here,
I wouldn't wanna make that an h1 because
it's not a heading in my document, right?
Whereas something like this,
this tags portion right here,
this is obviously heading, I would wanna
use some sort of heading tag for it.
That's kind of the idea here of
how we choose which tag to use.
You'll have a ton of practice by the end
of this course so if it's not sticking
quite yet, just know that you're
gonna get a lot of repetition on it.
Hopefully one of these
explanations of it will stick.
Practice, practice, practice, basically.
So h1's, that belies the fact
that there's probably an h2.
You're right, there's actually
h1 all the way down to h6 and
that's cuz you have headings and
sub headings and
sub headings on your sub
headings all the way down to h6.
I don't think I ever use h6's
to be honest with you but
they're available there if
you ever need it though.
Okay, know that if it's ever angled
bracket which is what these are called and
then slash it's always a heading or
a closing tag, right?
So, this slash belies the fact that it's
always going to be a closing tag, okay?
We'll talk about self closing
tags here in a little bit or
sometimes called void tags, though I don't
hear that definition very much anymore.
But that'll look like this, where you
have a slash there at the end and
that's a tag that opens itself and
closes itself.
Though technically you can actually
leave it off, it's optional.
Sometimes you will see opening tags
that don't close because they're
self-closing tags.
Again we'll talk about it, okay?
So you can nest tags as well, right?
So I have a div tag, which stands for
a division, as you're basically
saying here is a,
Something that's self contained and
let me rephrase that
here in just a second.
But I have an h1 tag here, right?
My Hi tag here, or I can put something
else, the title of my website, right?
But notice I have a div tag
that contains an h1 tag and
then it closes the div down here, right?
So that's kind of my point here is
you can have nesting of tags, right?
And I could actually put
another div in here.
And another h tag here,
the subtitle of my website, right?
And so I have an h1 here and
then I have another div here and
then I have an h2 here, right?
So you can see that showing up here.
So the question you might ask me is,
how much can I nest this?
And the answer is infinitely, all right?
Some of these,
if you looked them into my source code,
are nested probably 15 to 20 layers deep,
probably even more nested than that,
so there's no limit to how
much you can nest these.
But something I want
you to notice here is,
notice that I have div and
then if I open an h1 tag here,
then the next thing that I have
to close is this h1 tag, right?
So notice I opened the h1 tag,
I could not close the div here,
I have to close the h1 first
before I can close the div.
So let me show you an incorrect example
because I think that might demonstrate
it better.
I have the div tag here,
then I have the h1 tag.
Notice that this closes the div tag here.
This is incorrect.
I have to close the h1
before I can close the div.
So another way of verbalizing that
is that the most recently opened tag
must be the first one closed.
So this h1 here is the most recently
opened one or let's look at this h2.
This h2 is the most recently opened tag
therefore I have to close it before I can
close the div.
I think it's intuitive once
you start working with it but
it's kind of hard to verbalize, right?
But it just makes it so
everything neatly nests together,
think of those Russian nesting dolls,
right?
I have to close the inner one before
I can close the outer one, right?
You have to have pieces that fit together
and things that fit inside of each other,
it's kind of the same idea here.
That's kind of the basic
premise of what tags are.
We're basically just making content and
then we're putting them inside of tags
that describe what's inside of them.
So again think of it like writing a Word
doc but instead of going highlighting
something and saying, make this italics,
we're gonna put a tag around it that says,
this is emphasized text that then
describes what is inside of the text.
It's actually a relatively similar
process to writing a Word document.
Cool.
We'll talk about what divs are and
literally here in the next chapter,
so if you have a question
like what is a div?
I'm literally about to show you.
Right?
Let's get into types of tags.
So I've shown you an h1, I've shown you,
alluded to what a div tag is.
I'm just gonna go through it now and show
you a bunch of different kinds of tags.
So first one here,
we have the heading tag or the h1 tag.
But I wanted to show you that there's
actually all the way down to h6.
Now you might ask, Brian why does this
h2 have an underline underneath it?
It's actually using the CSS
directly from my website.
So every time you see one of these
with a underline underneath it,
it's my h2 tag, right?
So I have the h1 up here,
complete intro to web dev.
It's the name of my entire course, it's
the name of my entire document, right?
Some people will say that you can
only have one h1 tag on the page.
I'm not so
draconian that I think that's the case.
But some people will say that but
a good kind of information taxonomy
to think of is that you'll have an h1,
which is a title of a whole page.
And then you'll have sub headings, right?
So I have types of tags,
other things like that and
we'll have subheadings
throughout the entire page.
And then if my types of tags had
a subheading underneath that,
I would use an h3, so on and
so forth, it's with this.
So that you can have various
types of nesting of headings.
I've probably gone down to an h4 before,
I don't think I've ever used an h5 or
h6 before.
Because I don't think I've ever had
such nested information before but
you could and
it exists precisely for that reason.
But notice there's kind of this
implied information hierarchy by
making the heading smaller and smaller.
And again just to remind you,
these are editable if you
wanna mess around with them.
That's kind of the point here of me
making these little editable tags here so
that you can try them and see and
mess around with them and have fun.
There's a lot of learning to be
done in play I think, personally.
Okay, so I have a paragraph tag here and I
showed you that maybe a little bit earlier
but it's basically I have a paragraph
of text, literally this, right?
This would be a paragraph of text.
So a really good analogy for
paragraph text,
imagine you're reading a chapter book,
right?
And there's various different
paragraphs on the chapter book.
You can use a p tag to surround every
single chapter in the chapter book.
In a good place of when you
would use a paragraph, right?
Notice when you would end a block of text,
you would have some sort of hard return,
an indentation, right?
And you would continue on the text,
that grouping of text is when
you would use a p tag, right?
So here I have two different
paragraphs of text,
notice that it's nonsensical text,
it's called lorem ipsum text.
It's meant to just look like real text but
don't actually say anything,
it's a design thing that people do.
Yeah, I have two different
blocks of texts,
I would use two different
paragraph tags to do that.